#summary a guide to setting up Transformation and ETL

= Introduction =

This `HowTo` describes how to transform your local national data 
to INSPIRE harmonized data and how to embed this transformation in a
complete [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extract,_transform,_load ETL (Extract, Transform, Load)] chain.
This will be illustrated using
some of the existing transformation resources present within the project.
In the remainder of this document the term "ETL" will be used.

= Background Reading =

This section contains references to the main background knowledge that helps to
conduct the ETL.

== ETL Design and Tools ==
In order to grasp the steps that follow in upcoming sections we advise to
first read about the concepts, design and technologies underpinning the ETL.

The main document (HTML and PDF) to start with is [http://inspire.kademo.nl/doc]. Although this document has references to data  specific to the
[http://www.kadaster.nl The Dutch Kadaster] it has general applicability. In particular
the sections about [http://inspire.kademo.nl/doc/concept.html Concepts] and
[http://inspire.kademo.nl/doc/design-etl.html ETL Design] should provide the basic
information on the how and why of the ETL. This document also provides some
specific information on the [http://inspire.kademo.nl/doc/implementation.html ETL Implementation]
where actual code is even directly included within the document.

All code for existing ETL can be browsed
online via the [https://code.google.com/p/inspire-foss/source/browse/#svn%2Ftrunk%2Fetl ETL folder within the Subversion repository].
As you may have noticed the directory layout under the `etl` folder is organized by
`<Country>.<Data Provider>/<INSPIRE Theme>`, for example `NL.RWS/TransportNetworks`. Directly
under `etl` is a directory
called [https://code.google.com/p/inspire-foss/source/browse/#svn%2Ftrunk%2Fetl%2Fshared shared] that contains shared ETL code for multiple data providers and INSPIRE Themes.
Not all data providers follow this convention yet. Best is to look under
[https://code.google.com/p/inspire-foss/source/browse/#svn%2Ftrunk%2Fetl%2FNL.Kadaster NL.Kadaster] and [https://code.google.com/p/inspire-foss/source/browse/#svn%2Ftrunk%2Fetl%2FNL.RWS NL.RWS].


Further background knowledge that helps in understanding the ETL implementation deals with the technologies
that are used:

  * [http://gdal.org GDAL/OGR] core format and projection transformation. Although GDAL/OGR is an entire suite of libraries/tools, only a single command-line tool is used: [http://www.gdal.org/ogr2ogr.html ogr2ogr].
  * [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XSLT XSLT] is used for model/schema transformation. To about XSLT, the best source to start is [http://www.w3schools.com/xsl the XSLT tutorial at W3Schools.com].
  * The ETL chain and the invokation of the tools like `xsltproc` and `ogr2ogr` is all "glued" together using Unix/Linux shell scripts. To learn the [http://steve-parker.org/sh/sh.shtml Steve's Bourne / Bash shell scripting tutorial] is a good starting point.

== Your Data and INSPIRE ==
Whatever tools you will use to transform your data to INSPIRE, you have to be familiar
with the formats and schema's of both your data and the related INSPIRE data.

For INSPIRE data models you need to be familiar with the following:

  * XML Schema Definition Language (XSD) - see [http://www.w3schools.com/schema/default.asp tutorial at W3Schools.com]
  * GML (version 3.2.1) Schemas
  * ISO Application Schemas
  * The related INSPIRE Schema's (XSDs) for your target Theme(s)

All applicable XSD files have been added to the project and [https://code.google.com/p/inspire-foss/source/browse/#svn%2Ftrunk%2Fschemas can be browsed]
but the easiest is to use an XML editor or IDE like IntelliJ to be able to navigate the schema files.

Last but not least you need to have a specification of your own data.




